Do not start interpreting.
I am going to introduce my speech first.
Today I would like to talk to you in a very general way about Queen Elizabeth II.
But perhaps I am not talking about the Queen you think I am.
I have shared with you a number of proper names that will be helpful to you in the order in which they appear in my speech.
Having said that, I think we can begin.

Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
On 8 September 2022, Queen Elizabeth II died at Balmoral Castle.
Her death shocked public opinion in the United Kingdom and in the many countries of which Queen Elizabeth II was head of state, it also sparked some controversy.
Queen Elizabeth II reigned for 70 years, during which time the United Kingdom underwent great changes.
She began to reign over a country that still remembered the bombings of the Second World War.
She herself lived through the British victory alongside the United States, and has passed away in a digitalised world dominated by social media.

But today I would like to talk about another Elizabeth II.
I don't know if you know that Spain also had its Isabel II.

Yes, we also had an Isabel II, in the 19th century, the daughter of King Ferdinand VII and his fourth wife, María Cristina de Borbón II Sicilias.
She was born in Madrid on 10 October 1830.Like Britain's Queen Isabella II, she also became queen because of her father's death, but in her case this happened when she was only three years old.
For this reason, her mother, María Cristina, was appointed Queen Regent until Isabella turned 18.

María Cristina assumed the functions of the crown and had to confront Carlos de Borbón, her brother-in-law, Ferdinand VII's brother, who believed that he should be king and not Isabella.
This dispute led to the first Carlist War, which pitted the supporters of Carlos de Borbón against the supporters of Isabella.
It was a war that created two opposing sides.
On the one hand, the absolutists, who were in favour of Charles, and on the other, the liberals, who supported Isabella.
In fact, in order to gain support, Maria Cristina ceded part of the power of the crown to the liberals.During the 19th century there were three Carlist wars.
And there are historians who claim that the Spanish Civil War of 1936 was in some way related to these three wars that were fought during the 19th century.

During the reign of Isabel II, Spain was modernised.
The first railway lines, roads and bridges were built.
In terms of education, however, the situation did not improve much.
Illiteracy prevailed in Spain.
There were more than 6,000 villages without schools.
It was at that time that Spain consolidated its presence in Equatorial Guinea, an African country that was a Spanish colony until the middle of the 20th century.The time of Isabel II is considered one of the most corrupt in Spanish history, and the queen did not hesitate to intervene in politics.
She was not very popular and had to go into exile in France in 1868.

In fact, the problems were not only political, but also family-related.
Isabella II married her cousin Francisco de Asís de Borbón, or rather, she was married, as she was only 16 years old.
As Isabel II herself later recounted, when she was already in exile in France, she did not get on well with her cousin and husband Francisco, whom she called "la paquita", because, according to her, he was homosexual.

This last fact is not entirely confirmed, as there are authors who speak of Francisco and his mistresses in the feminine.
But there are also rumours that Isabella II's successor, her son Alfonso, was not the son of Francisco, but of a military man.
Years later, the same Alfonso became King Alfonso XII.
Isabella was able to return to Spain for a visit, but was never able to return to live in the country.

After a life full of ups and downs, including an assassination attempt by a priest, she died in Paris in 1904.
Today she is buried in the monastery of El Escorial, near Madrid.

I believe that, as interpreters, it is important for us to know the history of the countries where our languages are spoken, as it helps us to understand our speakers better,
Although we have not gone into detail in this speech, I have tried to give you an overview of what happened in Spain in the 19th century, corruption, illiteracy and division.
I hope it has motivated you to want to learn a little more about this rather turbulent period in Spanish history.
Thank you very much for your attention.
