                        WHAT FUTURE FOR WINTER SPORTS?
                                       
Will there be snow this Christmas?

A question that didn't exist when I was a child. Every winter was a white wonderland, and it often snowed heavily on Christmas Eve.
---
Hello Ladies and Gentlemen, my name is Anne-Lise Simond.

I was lucky enough to grow up in the French Alps, more specifically at the foot of Mont Blanc. In this majestic landscape, I spent winters where it snowed so much that we had to shovel the snow for long hours every day, to clear the accesses to our houses. After school, we often got together with other children to play in the snowfields until dinnertime.
As you will have understood, I had a snowy childhood, where there was never any doubt that we'd be able to ski every winter.
---
The seasons were long. December and January were very cold months. We frequently skied in temperatures as low as -15 or -20 degrees. You could truly say that I experienced the golden age of winter sports, a time of blessed abundance.

But in recent years, global warming has changed these conditions, and its effects are becoming increasingly obvious. While some scientists were already warning us about melting glaciers back in the 1960s, we have to admit that winters have become much worse over the last, I'd say, 10 to 15 years. 
As a winter sports enthusiast, I can't help but wonder and worry about the future of winter sports.

In this presentation, I'll start by taking stock of the current situation in winter sports. Then I'll talk about alternatives, which, while not always satisfactory, have the merit of existing. Finally, I'll share the thoughts of top sportsmen and women. We mustn't forget that between tourism professionals and these athletes, a whole part of the economy and the lives of thousands of people are at stake. According to the French government, quoted by AFP, 120,000 jobs in France depend on winter sports in the mountains.
---
Let's start by taking stock of the situation.
First, what is global warming? Let me quote the United Nation definition, which states that "the term `global warming' refers to long-term variations in temperature and climatic conditions. These variations may be natural, but since the beginning of the 19th century, they have resulted mainly from human activity". A sad observation. But I won't enter a moralizing debate here, where I'd be both judge and defendant.

Like any assessment, that of global warming can be expressed in figures. As this presentation is about the future of winter sports, I won't dwell on heatwaves, droughts, and cyclones.

Before quoting a few figures, I'd like to share my personal experience. Ever since I was a child, I have witnessed the retreat of the glaciers in my valley. It's a phenomenon that's visible to the naked eye and doesn't need graphs. Some glaciers have even disappeared before my very eyes. Every year, whole sections of mountain collapse as the permafrost melts, no longer acting as a cement and thus weakening the walls. Once again, I've seen it for myself.

According to Ludovic Ravanel, geomorphologist and CNRS (French national research center) research director, a study of photos of the Mont Blanc massif over more than a century proves that point. These collapses have been multiplying over the last 30 years, whereas they were almost non-existent before 1990.

But, for the more skeptical, or simply for those who like figures, here are a few:

The Mer de Glace, the third-largest glacier in the Alps, located in Chamonix valley (yes, it is!), is taking the full brunt of global warming. Since 2003, it has lost an average of 30m in length per year. Between 1990 and 2020, the glacier lost 130m in thickness. In the summer of 2023 alone, the lower part lost 14m.

On the website of the French Ministry of Ecological Transition and Territorial Cohesion, Ministry of Energetic Transition, you'll find some data that are as instructive as they are frightening.

ONERC (National Observatory on the climate change effects) provides indicators of the effects of climate change on mountain and glaciers.

Between 2021 and 2022, the five glaciers monitored lost 25 meters of water equivalent. In 2022, the Ossoue glacier, one of Europe's most southerly glaciers, recorded a record loss of 4.5 meters in thickness.

In terms of snow cover, ONERC cites the Col de Porte in the Chartreuse massif, at 1325m altitude, where the snowpack has decreased by 38cm between the periods 1960/1961  -  1989/1990 and 1990/1991  -  2019/2020.

As for the French ski resorts, over 150 have closed. By 2100, 93% of Alpine resorts and 98% of Pyrenean ones are likely to have disappeared with a climate warming of 3 degree Celsius.

Samuel Morin, a researcher at Météo-France (French weather forecasts) and CNRS, commented: "Future climate change will worsen snow conditions for ski resorts in all mountain regions of Europe, compared with recent decades."

That's all there is to it. The situation is not very encouraging. Our mountains and glaciers seem to be in a bad situation.

So, what solutions have been found to keep skiing despite the lack of snow?

---

Various alternatives have been developed to cope with the snow shortage. These inventive solutions are not to everyone's taste. From carbon footprints to high operating costs, each of these options has as many advantages as disadvantages.

Let's start with indoor ski slopes. The idea of these ski slopes originated in the 1920s. But it's only since the 1990s, that they've been made exclusively of "real" snow, with no additives. Today, there are over 110 tracks worldwide, mainly in Western Europe, but also in China and even in warmer countries such as Egypt and the United Arab Emirates.

However, the ecological impact of these resorts is questionable. On the one hand, the snow on these slopes is produced by cannons and therefore requires water reserves. Secondly, to prevent the snow from melting, the site must be kept at a constant temperature below 0°C. While this kind of venue allows you to enjoy the real sensations of snow, or even to discover it, in warmer countries the energy and economic costs are still too high.
The first site opened in Australia in 1987 and had to close in 2007 because it was too expensive. In France, the only center of this type, located in Amnéville, almost closed for the same reasons, before being bought out by the Dutch company SnowWorld.

However, in the face of their detractors, the promoters of these centers counter an ecological argument, namely that these places would pollute less than thousands of people who take their cars or the plane to go to the mountains, where snow cannons are also used.

I have to admit that every winter, I find the influx of cars rather frightening, especially as the Chamonix valley is very narrow and therefore leads to a concentration of vehicles.

The second alternative is to use dry runaways. But is plastic really that fantastic?
These demountable slopes require no air-conditioning and can be used all year round. Also known as summer skiing, this solution is still in its infancy, and materials are constantly evolving to achieve friction levels as close as possible to those of real snow. These are generally made of plastic, sometimes combined with other materials such as aluminum, depending on the company, and arranged in the form of vertical strands to imitate the sensation of sliding. 
While these tracks are energy-efficient, they are also controversial with residents. They complain about the visual impact on the landscape, the threat to biodiversity, and the release of plastic micro-particles as people glide along the track.

The last two solutions are more virtual. First, there are the infinite slopes. Behind this enchanting name lies a large conveyor belt, enabling several people to ski at the same time.
This is an interesting idea for beginners, who can easily learn to make turns. It's also great for cardio enthusiasts. However, the lack of variety and the absence of bumps will probably not be to the taste of the most experienced skiers, despite the possibility of adapting the incline to their levels.
Even more immersive, simulators offer a virtual reality experience, giving priority to different sensations.
Some include ventilation and vibration for the sensation of speed, but remain fixed, while others attach skis or snowboard to rails so that the user can slalom in front of a large curved panoramic screen, allowing athletes to train.
These simulators also have the advantage of allowing elderly people or disabled people to experiment these sports.

While these alternatives to traditional winter sports offer the opportunity to ski and snowboard in the absence of snow, they often have ecological drawbacks, as well as not offering a fully satisfying experience.

They also feel like a band-aid on a wooden leg. We treat the symptoms without trying to act on the causes.
That's why, in this final section, I'd like to share the thoughts of sportsmen and women on the adaptations that the various sports federations could put in place to reduce the footprint of their practice.

---

One of the solutions, which seems obvious, is to revise the race calendar, to better adapt it to the seasons. Let's face it, it's no longer that simple to ski as early as mid-November. What was obvious some fifteen years ago has become a virtual heresy. This year, we witnessed the distressing spectacle of bulldozers digging up a glacier in Switzerland to bring snow to a race site. The calendar has been pushed back by a week, but that's not enough, as underlined by the association POW, Protect Our Winter, which has launched a petition asking, "to adapt the competition calendar to reduce the impact of travel and respect climate change". Activists are now launching actions to denounce the inconsistencies of these competitions, as was the case at the start of the season in Sölden, Austria.

Several top athletes, such as biathlon champion Caroline Colombo, support this idea. They all talk about finding closer competition venues, or even holding two races on the same site, and putting an end to the back-and-forth, like skiers who go to the United States twice a year.

Snowboard cross champion Chloé Trespeuch also cites the inconsistency of certain competition venues, such as the Beijing Games, which used artificial snow exclusively. Indeed, it seems more coherent to organize the Winter Olympics in more suitable venues. In fact, this is what will happen for the next Games, which will be held in Milan, which already has the infrastructure and, incidentally, the snow!

While the International Ski Federation, and the International Biathlon Union, have finally banned the use of fluoride, which is harmful to the environment, they still have a long way to go when it comes to ecology. The IFS has hired a director of sustainable development, and I sincerely hope that this is not greenwashing, and that real action will be taken. It's no longer just a necessity, it's a matter of urgency.

While these solutions are specific to race circuits, some of them could perhaps provide ideas for ski resorts in general.

So why not limit the vehicle access to the resorts? Some of them, such as Avoriaz, Flaine and Gstaad in Switzerland, are already entirely pedestrianized.

Station openings could also be governed by a timetable, to curb the race to open earlier and earlier, whatever the cost.

---

It's true that winter sports are under considerable threat these days. The alternatives to this practice are not always satisfactory, and often polluting.

So, we need to take a more global view of the issue, and get back to the source of the problem, which affects the whole planet and all our lives.

To quote Samuel Morin, "a rapid reduction in greenhouse gas emissions would reduce both the risk of low snowfall for ski tourism and the need for snow production  -  and thus the demand for water, electricity and emissions that snow production requires." If global warming were to be kept below +1.5°C, only 4% of resorts in the French Alps would be threatened by a critical lack of snow, and this without artificial snow production.

So, we always come back to the same question: are we ready, as individuals and as a population, to make the necessary sacrifices for the survival of our habitat and our leisure activities?
What a question!







